{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;\red255\green255\blue255;\red56\green126\blue169;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl540\sa360\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Our democracy won\'92t work without a sense that everyone has economic opportunity.\'a0 Today, the economy is growing again; wages, incomes, home values, and retirement accounts are rising again; poverty is falling again.\'a0 The wealthy are paying a fairer share of taxes even as the stock market shatters records.\'a0 The unemployment rate is near a 10-year low.\'a0 The uninsured rate has never, ever been lower.\'a0 Healthcare costs are rising at the slowest rate in 50 years.\'a0 And if anyone can put together a plan that is demonstrably better than the improvements we\'92ve made to our healthcare system \'96 that covers as many people at less cost \'96 I will publicly support it.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 That, after all, is why we serve \'96 to make people\'92s lives better, not worse.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 But for all the real progress we\'92ve made, we know it\'92s not enough.\'a0 Our economy doesn\'92t work as well or grow as fast when a few prosper at the expense of a growing middle class.\'a0 But stark inequality is also corrosive to our democratic principles.\'a0 While the top 1% has amassed a bigger share of wealth and income, too many families, in inner cities and rural counties, have been left behind \'96 the laid-off factory worker; the waitress and healthcare worker who struggle to pay the bills \'96 convinced that the game is fixed against them, that their government only serves the interests of the powerful \'96 a recipe for more cynicism and polarization in our politics.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 There are no quick fixes to this long-term trend.\'a0 I agree that our trade should be fair and not just free.\'a0 But the next wave of economic dislocation won\'92t come from overseas.\'a0 It will come from the relentless pace of automation that makes many good, middle-class jobs obsolete.\cb1 \
\cb3 And so we must forge a new social compact \'96 to guarantee all our kids the education they need; to give workers the power to unionize for better wages; to update the social safety net to reflect the way we live now and make more reforms to the tax code so corporations and individuals who reap the most from the new economy don\'92t avoid their obligations to the country that\'92s made their success possible.\'a0 We can argue about how to best achieve these goals.\'a0 But we can\'92t be complacent about the goals themselves.\'a0 For if we don\'92t create opportunity for all people, the disaffection and division that has stalled our progress will only sharpen in years to come.\cb1 \
\cb3 There\'92s a second threat to our democracy \'96 one as old as our nation itself.\'a0 After my election, there was talk of a post-racial America.\'a0 Such a vision, however well-intended, was never realistic.\'a0 For race remains a potent and often divisive force in our society.\'a0 I\'92ve lived long enough to know that race relations are better than they were 10, or 20, or 30 years ago \'96 you can see it not just in statistics, but in the attitudes of young Americans across the political spectrum.\cb1 \
\cb3 But we\'92re not where we need to be.\'a0 All of us have more work to do.\'a0 After all, if every economic issue is framed as a struggle between a hard-working white middle class and undeserving minorities, then workers of all shades will be left fighting for scraps while the wealthy withdraw further into their private enclaves.\'a0 If we decline to invest in the children of immigrants, just because they don\'92t look like us, we diminish the prospects of our own children \'96 because those brown kids will represent a larger share of America\'92s workforce.\'a0 And our economy doesn\'92t have to be a zero-sum game.\'a0 Last year, incomes rose for all races, all age groups, for men and for women.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Going forward, we must uphold laws against discrimination \'96 in hiring, in housing, in education and the criminal justice system.\'a0 That\'92s what our Constitution and highest ideals require.\'a0 But laws alone won\'92t be enough.\'a0 Hearts must change.\'a0 If our democracy is to work in this increasingly diverse nation, each one of us must try to heed the advice of one of the great characters in American fiction, Atticus Finch, who said, \'93You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view\'85until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.\'94\cb1 \
\cb3 For blacks and other minorities, it means tying our own struggles for justice to the challenges that a lot of people in this country face \'96 the refugee, the immigrant, the rural poor, the transgender American, and also the middle-aged white man who from the outside may seem like he\'92s got all the advantages, but who\'92s seen his world upended by economic, cultural, and technological change.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 For white Americans, it means acknowledging that the effects of slavery and Jim Crow didn\'92t suddenly vanish in the \'9160s; that when minority groups voice discontent, they\'92re not just engaging in reverse racism or practicing political correctness; that when they wage peaceful protest, they\'92re not demanding special treatment, but the equal treatment our Founders promised.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 For native-born Americans, it means reminding ourselves that the stereotypes about immigrants today were said, almost word for word, about the Irish, Italians, and Poles.\'a0 America wasn\'92t weakened by the presence of these newcomers; they embraced this nation\'92s creed, and it was strengthened.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 So regardless of the station we occupy; we have to try harder; to start with the premise that each of our fellow citizens loves this country just as much as we do; that they value hard work and family like we do; that their children are just as curious and hopeful and worthy of love as our own.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 None of this is easy.\'a0 For too many of us, it\'92s become safer to retreat into our own bubbles, whether in our neighborhoods or college campuses or places of worship or our social media feeds, surrounded by people who look like us and share the same political outlook and never challenge our assumptions.\'a0 The rise of naked partisanship, increasing economic and regional stratification, the splintering of our media into a channel for every taste \'96 all this makes this great sorting seem natural, even inevitable.\'a0 And increasingly, we become so secure in our bubbles that we accept only information, whether true or not, that fits our opinions, instead of basing our opinions on the evidence that\'92s out there.\cb1 \
\cb3 This trend represents a third threat to our democracy.\'a0 Politics is a battle of ideas; in the course of a healthy debate, we\'92ll prioritize different goals, and the different means of reaching them.\'a0 But without some common baseline of facts; without a willingness to admit new information, and concede that your opponent is making a fair point, and that science and reason matter, we\'92ll keep talking past each other, making common ground and compromise impossible.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Isn\'92t that part of what makes politics so dispiriting?\'a0 How can elected officials rage about deficits when we propose to spend money on preschool for kids, but not when we\'92re cutting taxes for corporations?\'a0 How do we excuse ethical lapses in our own party, but pounce when the other party does the same thing?\'a0 It\'92s not just dishonest, this selective sorting of the facts; it\'92s self-defeating.\'a0 Because as my mother used to tell me, reality has a way of catching up with you.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Take the challenge of climate change.\'a0 In just eight years, we\'92ve halved our dependence on foreign oil, doubled our renewable energy, and led the world to an agreement that has the promise to save this planet.\'a0 But without bolder action, our children won\'92t have time to debate the existence of climate change; they\'92ll be busy dealing with its effects: environmental disasters, economic disruptions, and waves of climate refugees seeking sanctuary.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Now, we can and should argue about the best approach to the problem.\'a0 But to simply deny the problem not only betrays future generations; it betrays the essential spirit of innovation and practical problem-solving that guided our Founders.\cb1 \
\cb3 It\'92s that spirit, born of the Enlightenment, that made us an economic powerhouse \'96 the spirit that took flight at Kitty Hawk and Cape Canaveral; the spirit that that cures disease and put a computer in every pocket.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 It\'92s that spirit \'96 a faith in reason, and enterprise, and the primacy of right over might, that allowed us to resist the lure of fascism and tyranny during the Great Depression, and build a post-World War II order with other democracies, an order based not just on military power or national affiliations but on principles \'96 the rule of law, human rights, freedoms of religion, speech, assembly, and an independent press.\cb1 \
\cb3 That order is now being challenged \'96 first by violent fanatics who claim to speak for Islam; more recently by autocrats in foreign capitals who see free markets, open democracies, and civil society itself as a threat to their power.\'a0 The peril each poses to our democracy is more far-reaching than a car bomb or a missile.\'a0 It represents the fear of change; the fear of people who look or speak or pray differently; a contempt for the rule of law that holds leaders accountable; an intolerance of dissent and free thought; a belief that the sword or the gun or the bomb or propaganda machine is the ultimate arbiter of what\'92s true and what\'92s right.\cb1 \
\cb3 Because of the extraordinary courage of our men and women in uniform, and the intelligence officers, law enforcement, and diplomats who support them, no foreign terrorist organization has successfully planned and executed an attack on our homeland these past eight years; and although Boston and Orlando remind us of how dangerous radicalization can be, our law enforcement agencies are more effective and vigilant than ever.\'a0 We\'92ve taken out tens of thousands of terrorists \'96 including Osama bin Laden.\'a0 The global coalition we\'92re leading against ISIL has taken out their leaders, and taken away about half their territory.\'a0 ISIL will be destroyed, and no one who threatens America will ever be safe.\'a0 To all who serve, it has been the honor of my lifetime to be your Commander-in-Chief.\cb1 \
\cb3 But protecting our way of life requires more than our military.\'a0 Democracy can buckle when we give in to fear.\'a0 So just as we, as citizens, must remain vigilant against external aggression, we must guard against a weakening of the values that make us who we are.\'a0 That\'92s why, for the past eight years, I\'92ve worked to put the fight against terrorism on a firm legal footing.\'a0 That\'92s why we\'92ve ended torture, worked to close Gitmo, and reform our laws governing surveillance to protect privacy and civil liberties.\'a0 That\'92s why I reject discrimination against Muslim Americans.\'a0 That\'92s why we cannot withdraw from global fights \'96 to expand democracy, and human rights, women\'92s rights, and LGBT rights \'96 no matter how imperfect our efforts, no matter how expedient ignoring such values may seem.\'a0 For the fight against extremism and intolerance and sectarianism are of a piece with the fight against authoritarianism and nationalist aggression.\'a0 If the scope of freedom and respect for the rule of law shrinks around the world, the likelihood of war within and between nations increases, and our own freedoms will eventually be threatened.\cb1 \
\cb3 So let\'92s be vigilant, but not afraid.\'a0 ISIL will try to kill innocent people.\'a0 But they cannot defeat America unless we betray our Constitution and our principles in the fight.\'a0 Rivals like Russia or China cannot match our influence around the world \'96 unless we give up what we stand for, and turn ourselves into just another big country that bullies smaller neighbors.\cb1 \
\cb3 Which brings me to my final point \'96 our democracy is threatened whenever we take it for granted.\'a0 All of us, regardless of party, should throw ourselves into the task of rebuilding our democratic institutions.\'a0 When voting rates are some of the lowest among advanced democracies, we should make it easier, not harder, to vote.\'a0 When trust in our institutions is low, we should reduce the corrosive influence of money in our politics, and insist on the principles of transparency and ethics in public service.\'a0 When Congress is dysfunctional, we should draw our districts to encourage politicians to cater to common sense and not rigid extremes.\cb1 \
\cb3 And all of this depends on our participation; on each of us accepting the responsibility of citizenship, regardless of which way the pendulum of power swings.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Our Constitution is a remarkable, beautiful gift.\'a0 But it\'92s really just a piece of parchment.\'a0 It has no power on its own.\'a0 We, the people, give it power \'96 with our participation, and the choices we make.\'a0 Whether or not we stand up for our freedoms.\'a0 Whether or not we respect and enforce the rule of law.\'a0 America is no fragile thing.\'a0 But the gains of our long journey to freedom are not assured.\cb1 \
\cb3 In his own farewell address, George Washington wrote that self-government is the underpinning of our safety, prosperity, and liberty, but \'93from different causes and from different quarters much pains will be taken\'85to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth;\'94 that we should preserve it with \'93jealous anxiety;\'94 that we should reject \'93the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest or to enfeeble the sacred ties\'94 that make us one.\cb1 \
\cb3 We weaken those ties when we allow our political dialogue to become so corrosive that people of good character are turned off from public service; so coarse with rancor that Americans with whom we disagree are not just misguided, but somehow malevolent.\'a0 We weaken those ties when we define some of us as more American than others; when we write off the whole system as inevitably corrupt, and blame the leaders we elect without examining our own role in electing them.\cb1 \
\cb3 It falls to each of us to be those anxious, jealous guardians of our democracy; to embrace the joyous task we\'92ve been given to continually try to improve this great nation of ours.\'a0 Because for all our outward differences, we all share the same proud title:\'a0 Citizen.\cb1 \
\cb3 Ultimately, that\'92s what our democracy demands.\'a0 It needs you.\'a0 Not just when there\'92s an election, not just when your own narrow interest is at stake, but over the full span of a lifetime.\'a0 If you\'92re tired of arguing with strangers on the Internet, try to talk with one in real life.\'a0 If something needs fixing, lace up your shoes and do some organizing.\'a0 If you\'92re disappointed by your elected officials, grab a clipboard, get some signatures, and run for office yourself.\'a0 Show up.\'a0 Dive in.\'a0 Persevere.\'a0 Sometimes you\'92ll win.\'a0 Sometimes you\'92ll lose.\'a0 Presuming a reservoir of goodness in others can be a risk, and there will be times when the process disappoints you.\'a0 But for those of us fortunate enough to have been a part of this work, to see it up close, let me tell you, it can energize and inspire.\'a0 And more often than not, your faith in America \'96 and in Americans \'96 will be confirmed.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Mine sure has been.\'a0 Over the course of these eight years, I\'92ve seen the hopeful faces of young graduates and our newest military officers.\'a0 I\'92ve mourned with grieving families searching for answers, and found grace in a Charleston church.\'a0 I\'92ve seen our scientists help a paralyzed man regain his sense of touch, and our wounded warriors walk again.\'a0 I\'92ve seen our doctors and volunteers rebuild after earthquakes and stop pandemics in their tracks.\'a0 I\'92ve seen the youngest of children remind us of our obligations to care for refugees, to work in peace, and above all to look out for each other.\cb1 \
\cb3 That faith I placed all those years ago, not far from here, in the power of ordinary Americans to bring about change \'96 that faith has been rewarded in ways I couldn\'92t possibly have imagined.\'a0 I hope yours has, too.\'a0 Some of you here tonight or watching at home were there with us in 2004, in 2008, in 2012 \'96 and maybe you still can\'92t believe we pulled this whole thing off.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 You\'92re not the only ones.\'a0 Michelle \'96 for the past 25 years, you\'92ve been not only my wife and mother of my children, but my best friend.\'a0 You took on a role you didn\'92t ask for and made it your own with grace and grit and style and good humor.\'a0 You made the White House a place that belongs to everybody.\'a0 And a new generation sets its sights higher because it has you as a role model.\'a0 You\'92ve made me proud.\'a0 You\'92ve made the country proud.\cb1 \
\cb3 Malia and Sasha, under the strangest of circumstances, you have become two amazing young women, smart and beautiful, but more importantly, kind and thoughtful and full of passion.\'a0 You wore the burden of years in the spotlight so easily.\'a0 Of all that I\'92ve done in my life, I\'92m most proud to be your dad.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 To {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.latimes.com/topic/politics-government/government/joe-biden-PEPLT007548-topic.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \strokec4 Joe Biden}}, the scrappy kid from Scranton who became Delaware\'92s favorite son: \'a0You were the first choice I made as a nominee, and the best.\'a0 Not just because you have been a great vice president, but because in the bargain, I gained a brother.\'a0 We love you and Jill like family, and your friendship has been one of the great joys of our life.\cb1 \
\cb3 To my remarkable staff:\'a0 For eight years \'96 and for some of you, a whole lot more \'96 I\'92ve drawn from your energy, and tried to reflect back what you displayed every day: heart, and character, and idealism.\'a0 I\'92ve watched you grow up, get married, have kids, and start incredible new journeys of your own.\'a0 Even when times got tough and frustrating, you never let Washington get the better of you.\'a0 The only thing that makes me prouder than all the good we\'92ve done is the thought of all the remarkable things you\'92ll achieve from here.\cb1 \
\cb3 And to all of you out there \'96 every organizer who moved to an unfamiliar town and kind family who welcomed them in, every volunteer who knocked on doors, every young person who cast a ballot for the first time, every American who lived and breathed the hard work of change \'96 you are the best supporters and organizers anyone could hope for, and I will forever be grateful.\'a0 Because, yes, you changed the world.\cb1 \
\cb3 That\'92s why I leave this stage tonight even more optimistic about this country than I was when we started.\'a0 Because I know our work has not only helped so many Americans; it has inspired so many Americans \'96 especially so many young people out there \'96 to believe you can make a difference; to hitch your wagon to something bigger than yourselves.\'a0 This generation coming up \'96 unselfish, altruistic, creative, patriotic \'96 I\'92ve seen you in every corner of the country.\'a0 You believe in a fair, just, inclusive America; you know that constant change has been America\'92s hallmark, something not to fear but to embrace, and you are willing to carry this hard work of democracy forward.\'a0 You\'92ll soon outnumber any of us, and I believe as a result that the future is in good hands.\cb1 \
\cb3 My fellow Americans, it has been the honor of my life to serve you.\'a0 I won\'92t stop; in fact, I will be right there with you, as a citizen, for all my days that remain.\'a0 For now, whether you\'92re young or young at heart, I do have one final ask of you as your president \'96 the same thing I asked when you took a chance on me eight years ago.\cb1 \
\cb3 I am asking you to believe.\'a0 Not in my ability to bring about change \'96 but in yours.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 I am asking you to hold fast to that faith written into our founding documents; that idea whispered by slaves and abolitionists; that spirit sung by immigrants and homesteaders and those who marched for justice; that creed reaffirmed by those who planted flags from foreign battlefields to the surface of the moon; a creed at the core of every American whose story is not yet written:\cb1 \
\cb3 Yes We Can.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Yes We Did.\'a0\cb1 \
\cb3 Yes We Can.\cb1 \
}